A Superhero's Guide To Avoiding Community Burnout
=========

**(Slide 1)** So I want to start out with a little bit of a confession, with something that happened to me, I guess it's something I do. I don't expect everybody to understand it, because it's really a kind of bizarre thing that happens. I don't know if any of you have probably even seen it, but sometimes I get really irritated by what people write on the internet [laughter], you probably have no idea, like you've never seen or heard anything like that, but it happens to be a lot. Sometimes, there's a reason for it, sometimes it's justifiable sometimes not, but I think it happens a lot in a community There's Twitter and you know, all kinds of blogs and there's Tumblr and there is Hackernews. And everybody's got opinions and they have very strong opinions and they usually argue about those opinions. And so we have a whole bunch of opinions going on in a community and sometimes it gets really loud and sometimes it gets hard to figure out what we're actually talking about and are we talking to people and how is that all working out? And then we go to conferences like this and you know you're passionate people, you're here on a Saturday and you like talkign to people who like the samethings you do and are apssionate about things too. 

You probably have opinions as well, you probably have arguements and things like that. This isn't a bad thing,right? We have passion in this community, we have passionate people who want to fight for what they think is right even it's something it could be something trivial it could be your favorite tool. You have your favorite reasons why it's your favorite tool you have really good reasons why you like that particular tool and you want to talk about hem with other people.

That's not in a sense a bad thing. It's good to be excited about things.

But you know there's other things going on in a community too that it could be something very small like tools it could be something that we could make a joke out of or it could also be something like bigger problems or community that we need to address and deal with.

I was thinking about something that I would treat as a joke. I'm a designer and a front-end person so my favorite hobby on the internet is making fun of developers who buy Apple laptops and put stickers all over them.

This amazing masterpiece of modern, industrial design and you put stickers all over it. I'm like, I like to do that, and all the other developers here like to do that and that's... that's a joke. I think we can handle that in a community, most of us can. Some of them are just a little confused about it which I understand too.

Something like that goes on and that's just kind of cool. You know there's other things that kinda go on too.

Last year, I was at a conference or actually two different professional things, there was a work thing, and there was a conference I was at. And both times I had people come up to me and talk to me about my husband and his work and what we were doing there and I was like "I don't know what you're talking about" and they just assumed I was at this conference or I'm at this worker day because I'm there for my husband and not because I'm there to work or speak. 

And so that seemed like a community thing that we need to talk about a little bit more or not make a joke out of. Why are there assumptions like that in our community?

Am I really a part of the community? Are there assumptions that I shouldn't be here for some reason? I know there's lots of things that we could challenge, that we could talk about.

The thing is when we have all this stuff going on and we have all these people with passion and experiences and we need to talk about this and assumptions and this big huge mess of things, we can get really, really tired of trying to figure that out all the time. It's really hard to try to get back to connecting with people and you know away from all the jokes and away the assumptions and away from all the other stuff that's going on in the community.

I get really tired sometimes, trying to talk about all that stuff and trying to make sure that I'm connecting with people. I mean, it's hard! It's hard for everybody. But, my options are to figure out a way to do that or not be in this community any more. But I want to be a part of this community because there's really cool stuff here

So when I think about the things that  would like to change, that I would like to challenge, that I would like toto make better, that I can connect with other people, I realized that I need to come up with sustainable ways to do that. So how do I do that? So I'm going to tell you what I figured out as I went along.

**(Slide 2)** And really the way I should have done this in the very beginning: This is a pretty free-form talk, if you have anything you'd like to chip in ask or anything like that, please feel free to do that. And this is going to be a lot about experiences.I also want to preface this by saying that I don't think there are any real solutions that would work for every single situation or every single person, those just don't exist.

The things I'm going to go through are the things that worked for me. Hopefully there's things that will help other people, but you know, your mileage may vary on that.

**(Slide 3)** So the first thing that I thought is a really good thing that I need to do is I need to make sure that I always pay attention to the good stuff. So, instead of being wrapped up in what somebody's posting in the comments in Hackernews, which is usually really stupid...[laughter] and it is! You could say that, that it's really stupid but at the same time, people are doing really cool stuff. I know people that are doing really cool stuff and every time that I hear  about a bad situation regarding you know,  sexism or other activist causes that I work to fight against, there's a bunch of other people that are doing really could work to make that stuff better. Not that we just want to ignore the bad stuff but we need to put effort in to making sure that we're appreciating the people that are doing the good work at the same time. That makes me happy that they're out there and it makes them happy if someone takes the time and the spotlight off of the assholes and be like "you know what? You deserve some credit too, you're doing good stuff." It just makes me happy to see that happen all around.

**(Slide 4)** Make sure that if you feel that you're in the middle of messes that you don't know how to handle or there's too much negativity going on, take a step back, make sure you're taking care of your friends and that you're not doing it do do something thoughtless that may have inadvertently made them feel they weren't community. And we can reach out to new people to bring them into the community. We don't want all the bad apples who cause a lot of noise to define who we are. Because we're not the assholes on HackerNews. We're all of these really great people. So reach out and express that and bring people in.

And you probably had people who did that for you at some point. I know you do. I know I did. And sometimes we forget to acknowledge that. It's a really easy thing to do, especially as you go along in your career. Go thank the people that helped you and even if there's somebody out there that you've never interacted with, maybe you've seen them speak at a conference. I have people all the time who say like "I saw you speak but I didn't know if I'd come up and talk to you" or something like that and I'm like "that's what I'm here for". I'm here doing this so I can connect with people in the community. 

So reach out to those people. Chances are that they want to hear from you. Just take the time to thank them for what they do and create that connection. So if you're doing all these things and making sure that you're talking to people and appreciating the things that they're doing. When a problem comes up, it doesn't have to be this huge mountain of a problem because you always have these habits in place of "okay, we can deal with this and address this because we're all people and we've made these connections." We can just let it go. And if another problem comes up, as it will, we'll be in better shape to deal with it. And then move on from it and not keep going back to it after that. So balance it out with the good stuff that you have and you'll feel better to the bad ones as we go through it.

**(Slide 5)** The other thing that I found really helped me is do something about it. If you see something that bothers you, whether it's sleight or it's big If you don't think it's great, you know, do something about it.

I found that when I was frustrated about being the only woman in the room not having another woman that I could go to to ask questions in this community or things like that. A couple years ago, I started a chapter of Girl Develop it in Columbus Ohio and we do programming classes aimed at women beginner programming, HTML, things like that. And I took that action and I built something. And I built a new community of people who are actively reaching out and solving a problem that was affecting me.

That made a huge difference in how I felt about that. I was actually doing something. I wasn't just kind of being like "oh man, that really sucks and I hate this. Why is this that way? I don't like that I want it to be different." So do something that makes a difference. And there are so many different ways you can do that. You don't have to go build a whole new organization. Or do this great, great, big shift. 

**(Slide 6)** There's also little things you can do. You can volunteer. I did a website I just put together a few weeks ago. It was called [?]. Basically what I did as I went through the volunteer listings on idealist.org and there are a ton of non-profits that need developer help, design help, they need websites, they need databases, they need applications, and they're looking for people who want to help. So I made a little site and I gathered the ones that are the most promising. It's kind of the same

There's a lot of bad stuff that you read on the internet. Here's an opportunity just go do something about it, just put some good karma into the world, go help out somebody with the skill that you have. Which are pretty great. not everybody has the skill that you have. You have the ability to change things, to build things. So go find some place that needs your skills and so something.

It may not be able to help problem that you're concerned with or that's hurting you directly, but you know, it'll help cause some balance a little bit. You can also do things like mentor or teach. It's the same thignI talked about earlier, you know, reaching out and talking to people. There are so many people that are looking to learn what you know. They are desperate to learn these things. So just having somebody to reach out to them and show them where to get started and help them through that is amazing. And it makes you feel really awesome. How many people do any type of mentoring or teaching teaching? I mean, in any capacity? Is there anybody that doesn't like it? It's a little bit of a loaded question, thank you for not messing it up [laughter]. 

But I know that, for me, teaching it's amazing to bring somebody in and help them learn how to do something that they didn't know how to do before and seeing their excitement and what it means to them to now have these new powers, these new skills. It makes me, that's what I live for. It's awesome, it's the best thing ever. It'll definitely make you feel better about your place in the community if you can give that to people.

On the other hand, learn something new yourself. There are so many things that are being created all the time at an unbelievable pace. There is always something that you can go learn. I mean if there's something that you don't thing that you  learn. I said before I'm a designer. I did a lot of talking about how developers should understand design and that they shouldn't feel that it's scary. And it works the other way too. I tell designers all the time: "You need to understand code."

So there could be something, it's not just about learning , it's not just about learning a new language, or if that's your passion go for it, but keep in mind that there's lots of things to learn. You could learn about philosophy * even if it only helps you feel calm or excited or however you feel about going to work again. It doesn't have to have a direct link to it. Just be open to learning.

Go make something. It doesn't have to be something for someone else. It doesn't have to be something that's going to be a big huge deal. Just go do something. Put something out in the world that didn't exist before. Just that act of creation will lift your spirits and make you feel a little bit better about what you're doing and in the wider sense, in this community.

**(Slide 7) So this is a big one. This is probably the thing what I struggle with the most. So if I get angry with a situation, what's that all about? What if it's a situation that I should be angry at. What if there's a situation out there that's like "that's wrong that that happens". Maybe there's injustice going on. I feel that I should be angry about that and I don't want to be like "Well, I can't do anything about it" or it's just to help me to be angry, but it doesn't help you to be angry all the time. If you're angry and just angry, then you're going to just burn yourself out and you're going to end up hurting other people.It's kind of like this example. 

**(Slide 8)** So kind of like the Hulk my secret is that I'm actually always angry, but I've learned to keep control of it. If you just let yourself be angry and let your actions follow from that, that's when you do rampant destruction end up hurting people who don't deserve it and things like that. The hulk is not the hero because he's angry and smashing things. I'm a little bit irritated by the meme of the "Hulk smash". It's like yeah, he does, but that's not a good thing necessarily. Like, that's not why he's a superhero. He's not a super because he smashes thing he's a super because he can control that so that he can use anger for good.

So if you're just smashing and you're like well but I'm angry and I deserve to be angry so I'm going to smash things, there's not heroic about that. You have to learn how to smash appropriately. Otherwise, it's just not going to end in the effect that you want.

So the thing that I've learned about anger. You should feel whatever you feel. If you feel something, you could say, you don't feel it, but that's not very healthy. But you have to process and you have to take responsibility for it. And you have to find a way to channel that into something good and you're not just smashing shit up.

**(Slide 9)** Another thing that I have worked on a lot in the past couple years is practicing compassion and respect. And this is starting so sound all lovey-dovey that I went from Hulk smashing to loving people. But, there are two sides of the same coin. And the same with compassion and respect, it's funny, I feel like when I talk about these issues with these people, I get more push-back on the compassion and respect thing than I do with like the controlling anger and it's not because we don't want to be compassionate, respectful people, it goes back to this thing where if somebody did something wrong, then I don't want to be compassionate, I want to fix it, I want to Hulk smash. Why should I respect somebody who is doing something wrong. If I don't speak up do anything about it, if I don't do anything about it, then nothing is going to change and the community isn't going to change.

I get where they're coming from with that but that's not really a sustainable way of going about things. And that's very closely tied to the anger issue. It kind of works in the same process. You can feel anger and kind of see something that's wrong, but think about this empathy thing and thinking about how it does not happen in a vacuum. We're all people and there are a lot of things going on. You can separate your judgement about an action or a word or an anything really, an assumption. You can separate that from what you think about the person and what you're going to do about that. Those are two separate things.

So practice the compassion and that doesn't let them off the hook, that just makes you make sure that you're not going to be doing anything like they did in return just because you're angry or you know you're not taking [?] as a person.

**(Slide 10)** Be kind to people,- it sounds like I'm your kindergarten teacher and I'm trying to each you how to play nice in the playground. But I'm not trying to be overly cloying and I'm not trying to be all "oh, we're all just nice to each other and everything is cool." Because it's not that simple, but yet, sometimes, it is that simple. So if you think about that on a regular basis, about how you're only treating people how you want them to treat you. Be kind, be empathetic to what's going on with them. And think if keep that going with them, they're going to start doing that to you as well and then you won't have these misunderstandings, you won't have these assumptions, you don't have clashes and conflicts because they're seeing what you're doing. They're getting that.

You also have to really understand who you are, how you function and you know how what's best for that. Every one of us processes things in different ways and communicates  things indifferent ways. We have different experience so you have to put a lot of time and effort into understanding who you are so you're able to communicate that to other people so they don't misunderstand. You know we can have that empathy going back and forth , but you can't really do that if you don't know who you are or what you want or how you work best and all those things.

I learned for me personally, I do not thrive on conflict at all. Ever. Conflict completely drains me. Some people are not like this. Some people really like conflict. Some people love going into battle and they love having huge arguments with people and that's their thing. The thing is if you don't that's your thing and you don't know what other people's things are and you go and start creating conflict and you go and you don't confront or anything like that, then you guys are still missing each other because you're not communicating about that.

I learned about my self that I was trying to be really open to how people would be using conflict to you know, put forth the change that they though was necessary I couldn't participate in a community like that because it was completely draining me and wearing me out.

I realized that I work a lot better if I can do this kindness thing That's what sustains me doing the work that I want to do. So I have to understand about myself before I communicate that to other people. You know, about how I work in the community and how I work together.

**(Slide 11)** This is not always happy and fuzzy. Sometimes I think you need to leave a community if you feel really down about it. If you really feel that you don't want to deal with any comments any more and you don't want to deal with the frustrations any more, you don't want to deal with the passions that are out of control, you might need to leave. I don't think you have to do it permanently.

I think that what I mean by leave is just making sure that you're giving yourself enough room. Just take a step back and see the whole situation as it is. It's just that understanding yourself. There's no point in anybody that they're obligated to be in a community if they're not really feeling that they should be there.

**(Slide 12)** So take a break. Just get away from it. You don't have to give up on what you're doing. Some women say "well if I leave, all this stuff that I want to build, all this stuff that I wanted to change" Or you think it's not going to happen. You don't necessarily you don't have to do it in a large scale thing. You can do this on the independent level, on the individual level if you want to. And then maybe you'll get strong enough to back to do that.

I hear this from women all the time: "I don't want to leave the field because there's so few of us and I feel like I have to be here." You need to do what's right for you. You're not helping other women in the field by being the role model of a martyr. That's not really helping anybody. So if you need to leave, then leave. Take a step back and figure that out. If you come back, great. If you decide that you're better of in a different path, that's fine. We should not make people feel ashamed for that we should should support people for understand what they need to do.

**(Slide 13)** I know that "be the change you want to see in the world" is very, very clichéd. But it's one of those clichés that exists because it just makes a lot of sense and is just true. If you want a change to happen in your community, if you thinking the community should be more this or that, you need to do that yourself first. It's the only way to get that started. This is something definitely that ties into everything else I talked about, about kindness, respect, and controlling anger and things like that.

I would not be standing out here telling all of you to do this, you know to try this if I'm not everyday working on that myself. That would not be anything right a thing for me to do. So I've learned that if I want to share these things with the community and suggest things as things that we can do, I need to start making sure that I'm doing them myself. Otherwise, I'm not in a place to tell you that, and there's also the sense that not even what I'm  specifically saying.

**(Slide 14)** I learned this from this is my daughter Elizabeth. She is seven years old, I am teaching her HTML, she has her HTML tag here. As a parent and I'm a single parent and I have been since she was born. I learned very, very quickly that she pays way more attention to the things that I do rather than the things I say. I say things and if I go off and do opposite, she immediately picks up on that. That hypocrisy is the thing that she is going to follow. I learned very quickly that it's not enough to tell her that you should behave like this, you should do these things. If I'm not living those every second, it's just her and me and she's watching me all the time. She's learning from me how to be in that world. I don't want her to go out into the world and into larger community and not be practicing these things that I believe in. I want her to know how to do all this stuff so that she can navigate and learn her own things. I learned that the first thing that I have to do is to make sure that I'm doing every thing that I say I think other people should do because everybody is watching me. And that's okay in a non-creepy way [laughter].

There are other people that are looking for that and saying well does that work? Everybody is watching you in a community, again, in a non-creepy way. So if you're just behaving like this on a regular basis, you have no  idea, or if you're behaving oppositely, people are picking up on that. They're going to see if you do or say things that you don't actually believe in. They'll see that disconnect if you let it happen. So keep that in mind that you need to be that change because other people are paying attention to the things that you're doing.

**(Slide 15)** And that's all I have for you.