#Shepherding Unicorns: How to be a Good Web Mentor
**Distill 2014  
Palace of Fine Arts  
San Francisco, CA**

Slides [here](https://speakerdeck.com/jenmyers/shepherding-unicorns). Video [here](https://distill.engineyard.com/videos) or [here](http://vimeo.com/104147435).**[Title Slide]**  
So I want to talk to you today about mentoring and mentorship. And I started thinking about this topic because for a while now, I’ve had a lot of people ask me, people who weren’t in the tech industry, or don’t work or do things on the web, would ask me how I got into doing what I do, presumably so they could learn how to do it.Which is great. The only problem with this is that I don’t really know how I got here at all. My path to becoming a web designer and developer has been extremely strange and scattered, and there’s not a whole lot that I can tell people, “Yes, I started here and then I did this and I did that and I ended up here. And if you do that then it’s going to be good too.”I just, I can’t do that. So it started making me think about why can’t I do that and how do I tell other people to find their ways in here because I like what I do and I’d like to bring more people into doing that.So I started thinking a little bit more about education in general. I have a computer science background, but it was kinda weird. And then I’ve always been very naturally good at design things, so I self taught myself a lot of web design and I just took whatever job I could get, and kinda just cobbled together this career.That’s not a really good thing to be able to tell other people. So I got really interested in this idea of how can we bring people in in a smoother way?As they mentioned, I’ve been working with [Girl Develop It](http://www.girldevelopit.com/) for a few years, thinking about education in terms of bringing more people into the industry from a diversity standpoint. I’ve also for the last year and a half worked at [Dev Bootcamp](http://devbootcamp.com/), which is one of the coding schools that is trying to reimagine how we're educating people about this. And it's also made me realize, though, that we can't rely entirely just on these different programs or classes other people are doing to do all the work. There's a lot of things we need to do ourselves, just individually, to step up and be better mentors for the community and also help each other grow throughout our careers.

**[Slide 2: the state of web education]**To kind of talk about how we want to do this, I want to start where we are now in education, and I'm going to ask your for that. So can everybody here who has a college degree in exactly the work they do now raise their hands?
[Laughter] Even better, thanks.
Alright, how about, how many people here are entirely self taught in terms of the job they do now?
Ok, alright. Some of you didn't raise your hands at all. I thought those were two sides of the same coin. But, so somebody... Who has found a completely different way here?Alright, I'm not completely sure what those are but good for you.
How many people feel that sometimes it's challenging to keep learning in this field with the pace of new information?
Alright, cool. So thank you for giving me the answers that I was hoping for. So I don't have to, like, change my premise. That was really cool of you. But no, fortunately, this is, these are the type of things...
There's a lot of... there are some people who had some college degrees, some people who find it laughable, that's cool too. A lot of people who are self-taught. A lot of people who had, similar to my own experiences, different paths of coming here. And also, I think a lot of you, almost all of you were concerned  or worried about being able to keep up with new information.
So we kind of have this jumbled educational pathway here. And then, like I said, that pretty much mirrors what I've known in my own experience also what I've seen in my friends and colleagues. So I think it's fair to extrapolate that this is kind of the state of web education now: really, really fractured. Like I said before, that makes it really difficult to figure out how we're bringing people in and how we're growing people.
Also at the same time, we want to think about not necessarily just bringing people in, but how to get people to focus on a certain thing or not. As I mentioned before, I kinda have done some design and development and I've always been one of these in between people. That's how I've managed to get by.
But it's also really hard for us to teach people who have a really good holistic understanding of everything we're working with, maybe a whole product that we're making, or the web as a whole, or a whole user base, or many of these things that require a lot of understanding of many different moving pieces. I think we're also not searching for way to find people who have that full understanding of what's going on. Hopefully, you are with me, and you're like, "Yes, we need to fix this." If you're not though, there's a really important reason. At least, it's important to me; I'll make the case of why we need to bring more people in and educate them properly and make sure they understand the whole of what's going on.
**[Slide 3: graph with a single straight line increasing rapidly from "now" to "future"]**
This is a graph that is intending to depict internet use now, and web product use now, and where it's going in the future. It's very scientific cause I just made it up. But I'm not an expert, but I feel confident enough to say that the internet's not going to go anywhere, and we are probably not going to be using products on the web less than we are now. So the idea of making sure that what we're doing, what we're making, is equal to this demand and we have enough people to come in and actually make it. I don't think this is a need or a problem that's going to go away any time soon.
There's also a sense of the more people who are using things on the web, we wanna make sure, I wanna make sure, that the amount of people using it is also being reflected in who's being created. It's kind of this gap between consumers and creators.
I have and 8 year old daughter. And so, she loves the internet and stuff on websites, and things like that. But there isn't always a lot of that understand of what it takes to make that. And that worries me a little bit; I don't want to push her into any particular field, but I want her to have this education and understanding of what's involved in all of it, and what the relevance is, what the impact of it is. So as we move forward into the future, the need for having people who are very informed creators of the products that we're all going to be using on a regular basis means that we really need to make sure that we've got solid education bringing them in there and carrying them through.
**[Slide 4: unicorns]**
So I also want to talk quickly about the idea of unicorns, cause that was in my topic. Some of you may be here because you like unicorns; I mean this extremely metaphorically, sorry to disappoint. But unicorns is a word that gets thrown around a little bit in this industry. Everybody seems to have a slightly different meaning. I use it because it tends to refer to somebody who has skill sets that they're not supposed to have, that are even maybe opposed to each other.
A lot of times its a designer-dev. So you're, oh, you can't be both of those. But I think a lot of times it's anybody who seems to have anything that's beyond one narrow definition of what they can do or understand. As I said before, I think that this is something that we can stop saying unicorns are special people that just happen and that unicorns are people that we can foster and encourage and actually make, and that everybody actually has the potential and the capability to be a unicorn, to be somebody who can learn different skill sets, incorporate them in what they're already good at and have a wider, broader, more holistic understanding of what they're working with.
So not only do we want to educate people in our own narrow pathways, of how to get where what we're doing, but I think we also wanna think very carefully about how we're educating people to encompass a lot more than that and maybe do things that we don't think are typically within the same realm of skills. But pushing people to learn those things, even to a certain degree, and understanding the whole of what we're working on. And I do feel very strongly that we all have the potential to do that, to be unicorns if you will.

**[Slide 5: be the mentor you wish to see in the world]**Before we can get more people to learn all those things though, and become these things, we need to teach them. And as I've been talking so far, we have a little bit of a dearth of programs, university programs, non-university programs, all of this stuff, all the way back through school that is really gonna teach people how to do this. We can't really wait for them to catch up. This is moving really quickly, and slowly universities are catching up, slowly high schools are catching up, elementary schools, all of that. But we don't really have the time to wait for them to catch up, because it's already going too fast.
So our solution, really, is that we all need to do this in kind of a grassroots individual way. We're gonna work on education, and we're gonna work on making people into unicorns and we can't rely on anybody outside of us to necessarily do that for us. So we're gonna figure out how to it ourselves.
And the thing is, just like everybody has the potential to be a mentor... I ruined that, spoiled it, totally. Just as everybody has the potential to be a unicorn, everybody also has the potential to be a mentor, to a unicorn even.
So what we're gonna go through now is some of the tips and tricks that I've picked up in terms of how to teach people. Even if you think that you have nothing to share with somebody, or that you can teach it effectively, it's a learned skill, and you can completely learn these things. And a lot of times the things that we need to teach people in order for them to learn more are not necessarily the nuts and bolts of certain technologies or what you do from day to day, but it's a little bit more how we understand and teach things. So let's do that.
**[Slide 6: what do we teach?]**
If we want to start teaching, what is it exactly that we teach?

**[Slide 7: learning how to learn]**One of the most important things that you can teach somebody is how to learn themselves, to kind of learn the skill of learning. And that sounds very meta. But it is a skill.
A lot of people in here said they were self-taught, right? Did anybody teach you, told you that or was it just a long painful process of banging your head against walls and figuring things out? To a certain extent, there's gonna be some of that in there.
But we also have a sense of education. A lot of us were probably, if not all of us, were brought up in a sense of education where we go into a room and we sit down and something gives us things, and then we regurgitate it back, and we get a mark, good or bad, and that's education. We memorize some things, and we've proved we memorize some things, and we get to pass on to the next level of memorizing things, and we're educated. In some certain senses, that's a good thing, but how much are we really learning when everything is being spoon-fed to us? How much are we really getting out for ourselves?
So this idea of unlearning those expectations and learning what we can do to dig out information for ourselves. And more importantly than that, the way to dig out information you need is learning how to ask the right questions and formulate an understanding of what the problem at hand truly is so that you can figure out how to go find the information about it.
And honestly, learning how to ask the right questions is a lot more difficult than finding the answers to those questions. It's about problem solving. It's about information gathering. It's the same type of thing that most of us do on a daily basis when we have a problem to solve at hand. Learning anything is no different from this, and you can through a practice, and working with other people build up these skills of how you're conceptualizing a problem and how you're figuring out how to target the information that you need to go out and find.
So this idea of learning how to learn is actually one of the most important things that we can mentor other people in and giving them a space to unlearn the old ways of learning and not being expected to be handed everything, cause they're not really going to get as much out of that in the end. If we can teach them how to learn, then they can continue to learn even when us, as their mentors, are not around.**[Slide 8: self-directed learning]**
Going right along with that is this idea of self-directed learning. So, if you're gonna be a mentor to somebody, or if you want to learn how to teach, you don't necessarily want to show them the way or say, "You have to go exactly here."
There's a lot of reasons that wouldn't necessarily be the most effective way for you to mentor somebody along, the first of which being that you're not really sure where they need to get to. They're probably not sure where they need to get to; nobody needs to know where they need to get to. That doesn't even really matter. But if they can focus on what they're interested in, what they're passionate in, what other skill sets of backgrounds they may bring to it. And if that is a part of the learning process, then you're going to be able to discover new things to learn and discover a new path. And I think that's much more authentic learning that's going to be happening there, rather than trying to get to a goal that they're not entirely sure that they want to get to.
As I said, I worked in a coding school for the last year and a half, and we used a metaphor often: the idea between a restaurant, and then chefs in a kitchen. It also goes back to what I was talking earlier about learning to learn. And you kinda have two ways that you can approach this: You can approach learning as a restaurant, where you go in, and you get seated and you pick certain things off of a menu, and they are delivered to you, and then you eat them, and that's it. That's the end of your experience, and if you want to do it all over again, you have to go to another restaurant and they give you another fixed menu and you pick things off of that, and repeat.
Or, you could have a kitchen full of chefs and be invited to come in and cook with them. And work right alongside of them and be in a really active, busy environment and probably screw some things up, but learn as you go out to be part of creating something. And what you're creating is your own learning style, and you may have other people around you that you are contributing to their projects are. You're not dictating the entire terms of what you're learning, but you're in an environment where you're not just being handed things that you picked off a menu. You're in an environment where you're creating new opportunities. And this is a really self-directed way to approach it, where you can come in on your own and jump in, bring everything you have with it and kind of work out your own direction from there.A lot of learning, in my experience, has stuck a lot more when you invite people to come learn with you, as opposed to order something off your menu. So as a mentor what you probably want to do is kind of create place where you can invite people in to work right along side of you in a safe place, and not necessarily decide for them what you need to hand off to them.
**[Slide 9: holistic learning]**

In the same sense, we really wanna focus on this idea of holistic learning. If you wanna teach somebody along, you could just say, ok, this is how this one particular framework works. Or you could give them a sense of why you would wanna use that in the first place, or why you would use that rather than something else, or what happens if you do that and what are the consequences of all of that.

This goes back to what I was talking about... is problem solving... is what you wanna teach is less about a particular technology or language or any type of tool that you may teach a student. What you wanna teach them is more of a higher level of understanding the whole sense of why you're doing what you're doing, and exploring with that, and that may encompass different skills than what you're anticipating. You may need to understand a little bit more about the problem at hand.

So if you're learning how to build a web application, you don't necessarily wanna learn just how to use a certain language or a certain framework, but maybe understand about, well, what can I do with this? How does this mirror a real world problem? How would a user interact with this? There's a lot of different disciplines and skill sets that would come in to having a greater understanding. You don't need to understand everything about all of it, but having a sense of how all the pieces fit together is really useful for somebody who's coming in. And sometimes it's almost essential for a student to understand why they are learning the particulars if they have a larger context to place them in.

So, as a mentor, you never wanna underestimate the importance, really, of giving students a larger context for the things that they're learning and working in so that they know why they're doing it and they're able to conceptualize that. And that... we're gonna give them the opportunity to practice their communication skills and as hopefully most of us know, communication skills never hurt you when you're working on problems with other people. So the more you can understand about contextualizing a problem, the more you're going to be able to communicate with people as you go on in your career and your own learning, and understanding how to talk to people about these things.

So that's essentially what.
**[Slide 10: how do we teach?]**
Your idea, ok, that's cool. I mean, hopefully, you're like, "That's cool." And it's like I would like to try that, though, how would I actually go out and teach these things to people, and try to see if I can actually help somebody along with some of these principles?
So how do we actually do that?**[Slide 11: apprenticeships]**
One of the easiest ways if you're a company is start creating some apprenticeships, and bring in beginners, and get them into your workflow, and teach them this stuff. Do anybody have and apprenticeship program at the company they work for?
Ok, a few people do. More and more are coming out cause there's more and more demand for people doing this type of work, as you saw in my very scientific graph (sarcasm).
And there's a lot of people who wanna keep learning about this sort of thing, so having a program that can specifically bring beginners in and get them into a workflow of creating whatever it is you happen to be creating... is a really great way to bring new people in, get new people jobs, and get more stuff that you wanna do done.
The thing to remember about apprenticeships as opposed to something like just bringing in somebody who's a beginner and throwing them into the fire, or creating a brief internship that is ending with them leaving the company... An apprenticeship is usually a very structured process that really brings people into a supportive environment, not necessarily just putting a new person in there for cheap labor or hoping they can get everything on their own. You wanna create people who are good at self learning, but you don't wanna force them to be left out in the cold when they're trying to learn.
So it's really important when we think about apprenticeships and how we are bringing people into companies that we're thinking of, "How are we going to support them in their learning? How are we gonna make sure that they're going to be given enough autonomy to learn on their own, but also given enough structure and support through all of that, that at the end of it they're somebody that we would actually want to work with?"
That takes time and that takes some effort to figure out the best ways of doing that. So, hopefully as we go along, we'll get more and more of a sense of how companies can effectively devote the time and energy to bringing in people and teaching them in all of the ways we do.
**[Slide 12: community]**
A much easier to do this, though, is just to look out for community. If you're not at a company that has that, or if you don't have the resources to build an actual program, you can do this on an individual level too. There are a lot of people who are learning how to code right now. And because we don't have a lot of clear pathways for those, there are a lot of different programs that are trying to fill these needs.
All of them need mentors, so if you are interested in helping people to learn these type of things, the options that you have to go, and finding people that you can mentor are pretty much endless. Maybe not exactly endless, but there's a lot of them out there.
**[Slide 13: Girl Develop It, Dev Bootcamp, Rails Girls, Black Girls Code, CoderDojo]**
This is a quick list of some of the organizations that I've been involved with that I know need mentors.
[Girl Develop It](http://www.girldevelopit.com/) is a program, a grassroots organization, that offers programming classes aimed at women; they usually do evening and weekend workshops, complete beginners. They always need TAs and mentors.
As I mentioned, I've also worked for [Dev Bootcamp](http://devbootcamp.com/), which is one of the coding schools that also has a lot going on now. Those are usually more intensive full time programs who, again, always, always need mentors from the industry coming in and helping these beginners along.
There's also some workshops like [Rails Girls](http://railsgirls.com/) and [Black Girls Code](http://www.blackgirlscode.com/) and [CoderDojo](https://coderdojo.com/). Those last two are focused on younger kids; the earlier we can get 'em, the better.
So all of these organizations are virtually volunteer-run, and even if they're not completely volunteer run, they really need volunteers to help mentor and encourage all of the students that they have. So, if you're looking for somebody to mentor, and to practice your own teaching skills on, just go looking around, see what's in the community, maybe even just put the offer out in your own circles. I've put the offer out to mentor people in various things, mostly around getting started speaking and things like that. And people will come, because there's so many people who wanna learn new things.
So the actual mechanics of how to do this, whether it's on a larger scale like within a company for an apprenticeship, or you just do it individually on your own, there's usually a way to make it happen.

**[Slide 14: Pairing is Caring]**  
***Note:** This version of the talk does not feature the [Pairing is Caring](http://mentoring.devbootcamp.com/) slide, but you can still [sign up for mentoring](http://mentoring.devbootcamp.com/availabilities). In-person mentoring is offered in Chicago, San Francisco, New York, and Columbus; online mentoring is also available.*
**[Slide 15: open source]**
Another way to do this is to really dig into the open source community. And there's a lot of potential here, especially for cross-discipline mentorship. So maybe if you are developer and wanna a little bit more about design, one of the best things that you can do is jump into an open source project that needs some design help. And there's a few of them, and a lot of them are open to that sort of thing. And being able to be in a project with a bunch of pother people that will let you explore and learn on your own is a great thing.
And if, on the other hand, you're the maintainer of a project like that, you can, you know, ask for people who are beginners, ask for people have different skill sets than you, and just kind of give them that freedom to explore and see him it goes. That's a much more, kind of, hands-off type of mentorship, but the nice thing about that is that can work for you too if you wanna turn around and be the student for a little while. There's a lot more freedom there to learn new things, so digging into some of these projects... and if you are somebody who wants to bring people into that, remember that you can do it better by keeping the barrier to entry really low. Document your project really well, and specifically reach out for people who are beginners or learners and create an environment where they can explore and succeed. Be available for questions; be clear about what you're doing, and if you're into that sort of thing, maybe you can find other people who will do the same thing and explore in your own ways.

**[Slide 16: why do we teach?]**
So hopefully, you're all here, you knew what I was talking about... so hopefully you're excited about education and you think it's fundamentally a good thing. If I have to sell you on that, I can work on that a little bit more later, and I will work on that.

But we covered kind of what I think we should focus on teaching and the nuts and bolts of how you go and do that and there's this other sense here of, "Why do we really wanna do this?"

There's a greater need, ok, cool, but I don't feel moved by that; I don't feel connected to anything there.

Here's the thing: one of the best things about being a teacher or mentor, and I've alluded to it a couple of times already, but this is the main point that I want to make, is that it does amazing things for your own learning process and your own understanding of what you're working with. There's no better way to figure out what it is that you don't know, or that you need to know better by trying to teach it to somebody else.

Go ahead and try it sometime, this thing that you know backwards and forwards and inside out and upside down, just sit down and try to explain it to somebody who has no idea what you're talking about, and see how quickly it starts falling apart. There's sometimes, there's a lot we take for granted, working every day with... there may be gaps in our own understanding or maybe there's something that we think we understand, but turns out we don't really do that. So by teaching, you get a good sense of your own learning process and the better that you can help other people through it, the more you learn about what you need to keep growing yourself. 

A lot of people mentioned earlier that they feel a little worried about continuing to learn in this industry, and finding the resources for that. So just like I've been instructing people to mentor others, focus on how to *learn how to learn*, and your own self-learning, and those own skills, and you can build those up in yourselves as well. It's really amazing to be able to see potential get unlocked, whether it's outside of you or inside of you.

That's one of my favorite things about teaching, is being able to really see the connections being made in a larger context being built. It also really starts this domino effect. If you start teaching other people, and other people start seeing the benefits it had with you and there's other people that wanna do that too. And then they start teaching other people and it just kind of... it doesn't stop after that, cause it's inherently a really positive thing. So that more you can do that, the better.

It also really helps, I've mentioned this a couple times too, that the more that you understand about different areas, and the more you're ok about jumping into new things, the better teacher you're gonna be, cause you're gonna understand what that means to jump into something new. and hte more you're around that, and the more you're around people who are always jumping into something new, the more likely you're gonna be to want to do it yourself.

The most important thing I've gotten out as a teacher is this constant reminder of how cool it is to learn something new. Scary, but cool. And that taking that risk is always worth it. As I've gone on, gotten older in my career, and gone along, as I've gone... I don't take as many risks in learning new things. "Like, I know this stuff; I'm just gonna do this for a while. That looks really interesting, but I don't know, I don't really know it, so I'm not gonna do it cause it's kinda scary to jump into all of that."

When you're around people who are learning a whole bunch of new things in the beginning and are really excited about it, and really scared, and constantly going through this whole process, it's hard to not remember that's it's a really exhilerating process and that even if there's that fear and the scariness, the risk is usually worth it. So, reminding yourself of that is a really good thing, I think just, in general, remembering why you want to do what you do and keep learning about what you do.
**[Slide 17: picture of Jen's daughter with HTML < strong > sticker]**
So this is a picture of my daughter, Elizabeth; I teach her HTML. Those are little whiteboard magnets she has that have HTML elements on it. And I asked her once what was her favorite HTML tag, and she pulled that one (the HTML < strong > tag). It was too good not to make an explainable moment out of, so I did. Honestly, like, thinking about her and her learning process and the world that she's moving into, is the best way that I can summarize all of the things I was just talking about.How I feel about education, and how we need to change it. How I feel about bringing new people into this industry and how I feel about making sure that we are all, every one of us as individuals, mentoring people to be creators, and not just consumers.
I grew up in rural, working class Ohio, so I didn't really have access to computers and the Internet, or virtually anything until I was in my 20s. My daughter has had an iPad since she was, like, 2. So we have completely different perspectives on technology and how we interact with it and how we use it in our lives.
My theory was that because she had all this access to technology that I never had, my theory was that she was immediately going to be so much more technical than I ever was, and she was gonna be programming when she was 5, and just be, like, all over everything. And I realized soon enough, she just turned 9 on Tuesday... This was a couple years ago, so... but yeah, so she's 9 now and it's not that she's not interested in this, but she really only consumes.
What I realized is that it is so ubiqituous and so accessible to her that she doesn't really think about it. She just... it's just there; it's a part of her world. All this technology and computers and applications and video games and everything is just there. And so it's actually harder to really learn how to create it and understand why you would want to create it in the first place. I want her to be able to have the power to create, have a say in creating things; that's really important to me. I think that as we move forward into the future and more and more products are being created, the web is more and more a part of our lives. I want everybody to be able to have a say in it; that's very important to me.
So we have to focus on education; we have to start in the beginning and we all have to kind of individually do our part to make sure that everybody gets a say in this thing that we're building that's going to be shaping our entire future.
So, that's a very, like, epic thing, I know. But I want to bring it back down to what I just said, is that that's a very ambitious goal, but it doesn't have to be done by any sort of large organization. It's not necessarily a government thing; it's not a university thing; it's not something that we have to wait for other people to put into place for us so that it can happen on that large scale. We can actually make it happen on that large scale all by starting just with us individually, and each doing what we can in our own little spheres. Because if we all do that, then we have a much larger sphere that we just created.
So, hopefully, this has given you an idea of what it takes to reach out to people who don't already create in this sphere, and educate them about how they can and what it will take to do that. And understanding what the relationship is to teach somebody that, how's it's gonna benefit you, even. And look forward in the future to creating a whole bunch of creators and not just the consumers we have.
**[Slide 18: Jen Myers jen@devbootcamp.com [@antiheroine](https://twitter.com/antiheroine)]**
***Note:** The video linked above includes approximately 20 minutes of Q&A follwing the talk (starting right at the 30 minute mark) that is not in this transcript.*